---
layout: post
title: Travel Demand Models Should be Bayesian
---

*This is the first on a two-part series on using Bayesian methods in travel demand modeling. 
In this post, I focus primarily on the benefits and challenges of such an effort.
In Part 2, I go over some technical details.*

### *Suffering from Success*

$\mathfrak{In}$ the early 1970's, Daniel McFadden had an immediate opportunity to test the work that would eventually earn him a Nobel Prize. 
In conjunction with his work successfully linking random-utility theory (or random-utility maximization, RUM) to the multinomial logit (MNL) model, McFadden applied his methodology on a choice survey of San Francisco Bay Area households -- in anticipation of the grand opening of Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART)[^1]. 
The purpose of the survey was simple: use data from the real world to try to estimate how many people would use BART in place of their car or the already existing bus service. 
The distribution of people using car, bus, or BART is called the "mode share," and it, too, can be estimated using an MNL model. 
I'll skip over the modeling details and cut to the chase: the mode share predictions from McFadden's modeling were good.
Very good, in fact. Here's a table showing the breakdown:

[^1]: For a much richer account of this great story, see the [Nobel Prize lecture from the man himself.](https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/mcfadden-lecture.pdf)

|            | MNL model prediction | True mode share |
| ---------- | -------------------- | --------------- |
| Solo Car % | 55.8%                | 59.9%           |
| Carpool %  | 22.9%                | 21.7%           |
| Bus %      | 14.9%                | 12.2%           |
| BART %     | 6.3%                 | 6.2%            |

As you can see, the mode share predictions from the MNL model were quite close to what eventually came to be a few months later.
This looks a lot like a resounding success.
But was it?

Well, yes, in many senses it was. 
The MNL model became the workhorse "mode choice" model that, along with its generalizations and expansions, is still widely used in both transportation research and practice to this day. 

